~bUsing Color~B

As explained in the ~bTerminal Attributes~B help topic, MightEMacs provides the
ability to display text in bold, underlined, reverse video, or color (or any
combination of those attributes) in a window or on the message line by coding
terminal attribute specifications in the text.  Please refer to that section for
details.

In addition to displaying colored text in a window or on the message line, you
also have the ability to display mode lines in color and/or set colors for
informational displays generated by the ~ushow*~U commands.  This is done by setting
the $displayColors system variable to the colors you want to use.  The variable
controls the text and background colors of all informational displays, all mode
lines, and also the text and background colors of the "keyboard macro recording
indicator", which is displayed on the mode line at the bottom of the screen when
a keyboard macro is being recorded.

The colors for each item are set by assigning an array of three values to
$displayColors.  Each value is a color pair, coded as a two-element array of
integers.  (You do not have to define the color pairs with ~usetColorPair~U
beforehand, however.)  The first value is the desired foreground and background
colors for informational displays, the second value is the desired colors for
mode lines, and the third value is the desired colors for the keyboard macro
recording indicator.  Any of the three values may be nil for the default (white
on green for informational displays, reverse video for mode lines, and white on
red for recording indicator).

For example, the following code snippet would set mode line colors to white on
dark blue and leave the informational display and recording indicator colors as
the default:

    $displayColors = [nil,[15,4],nil]

This is typically done in the site startup file, /usr/local/lib/memacs/site.ms,
or the user startup file, ~~/.memacs.
